New features in zsh version 2.5

Greatly expanded completion possibilities.  Programmable completion
allows detailed control over what arguments of what commands can be
completed to what.  See dots/zcomp in the distribution for examples.

Expand filenames with ~ and = on the right hand side of parameter
assignments.  New option MAGIC_EQUAL_SUBST to do it in all
identifier=expression arguments.

${+name} becomes 1 or 0 if name is set or unset.  ${~spec} toggles
GLOB_SUBST in substitution.  Parameter substitution takes lots
of flags in the format ${(flags)name}.

New glob qualifiers for block/character special files, times in glob
qualifiers can be in months, weeks, days, hours, minutes.  Qualifiers
can work on links or on what they point to.  Qualifiers separated by
commas are or-ed.

New parameter substitution modifiers (fFwW) to repeat actions.  New
option CSH_JUNKIE_HISTORY.

New line editor functions history-beginning-search-backward,
history-beginning-search-forward, expand-or-complete-prefix,
push-input, push-line-or-edit.

Assign to part of a string, use qualifiers on string subscription with
$foo[(qual)2,5]

New parameters: EGID, EUID, KEYTIMEOUT

New prompt escape sequence %_ to get constructs like for and while in
the secondary prompt.  %E in prompt clears to end of screen.

Conditional expressions in PROMPT and WATCHFMT.

New options ALWAYS_LAST_PROMPT, ALWAYS_TO_END, AUTO_PARAM_KEYS,
COMPLETE_ALIASES, COMPLETE_IN_WORD, CSH_JUNKIE_HISTORY,
GLOB_SUBST, LIST_AMBIGOUS, MAGIC_EQUAL_SUBST, NO_FLOW_CONTROL,
PROMPT_SUBST

New option -m to many builtins makes arguments subject to pattern
matching.

Bindkey can now bind both key sequences and prefixes of those.  You
can for example bind ESC and function keys sending ESC sequences.

Additional options to read builtin to use in functions called by
completion.

New options to print to sort arguments and print them in columns.

Some additional resource limits can be specified.

Some editor functions now work in the minibuffer.
